---
layout: post
title:  "Section 4.3: Exercise 21"
date:   2024-08-31 01:01:36 -0700
categories: jekyll update
mathjax: true
---
<div class="ydiv">
4.3: Exercise 21
</div>
<div class="ybdiv">
Prove that if \(M \in M_{n \times n}(\mathbf{F})\) can be written in the form
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	M = \begin{pmatrix}
	A & B \\
	O & C
	\end{pmatrix}
	\end{align*}
	$$
where \(A\) and \(C\) are square square matrices. Prove that \(\det(M) = \det(A)\det(C)\)
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof:</b>
<br>
<br>
Suppose $$A$$ is of size $$k \times k$$ and $$C$$ is of size $$m \times m$$, then we know that $$k+m=n$$ and $$O$$ is of size $$m \times k$$. We have two cases. If $$A$$ is not invertible, then we know that $$\det(A) = 0$$. Moreover, the columns of $$A$$ are linearly dependent and the rank of $$A$$ is less than $$k$$. But $$M$$ contains $$k+m$$ columns and since the first $$k$$ columns are linearly dependent, then the rank of $$M$$ is less than $$k+m$$. Therefore $$\det(M) = 0 = \det(A)\det(C)$$ and we are done.
<br>
<br>
Suppose that $$A$$ is invertible. Then define
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
     P &= 
 	 \begin{pmatrix}
 	A & O' \\
 	O & I_m
 	\end{pmatrix},
	Q = 
	\begin{pmatrix}
	I_k & A^{-1}B \\
	O & C
	\end{pmatrix}
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
Where $$O'$$ is of size $$k \times m$$. Note here that $$PQ = M$$. We claim that $$\det(P) = \det(A)$$ and $$\det(Q)=C$$. Once we show this claim is true, then we can conclude that $$\det(M) = \det(P)\det(Q) = \det(A)\det(Q)$$.
<br>
<br>
To show that $$\det(P)=\det(O)$$, We'll prove this by induction on $$m$$.<br>
Base Case $$m=1$$: $$I_m$$ is of size $$1 \times 1$$. $$O$$ is of size $$1 \times k$$. The last row of $$P$$ therefore contains a row of zeros followed by 1. Computing the determinant of $$P$$ by cofactor expansion along this last row yields exactly $$\det(A)$$ as required.
<br>
<br>
Inductive Case: Suppose this is true for $$m-1$$. We will show that this is true for $$m$$. In this case $$O$$ is of size $$m \times k$$ and $$I_m$$ is of size $$m \times m$$. The last row of this matrix is also a sequence of zeros followed by a 1 by the definition of $$O$$ and $$I_m$$. So compute the determinant by cofactor expansion along the last row to see that $$\det(P) = 1 \det(P')$$. where $$P'$$ is the matrix $$P$$ but with the last column and the last row. We can now apply the inductive hypothesis to conclude that $$\det(P') = \det(A)$$ and therefore $$\det(P) = 1\det(A) = \det(A)$$ as we wanted to show.
<br>
<br>
We can use the same inductive proof to prove that $$\det(Q) = C$$. Once we do so, we are done. 

 $$\ \blacksquare$$
<br>
<br>
<!------------------------------------------------------------------------------------>
<h4><b>References:</b></h4>
<ul>
<li><a href="https://www.amazon.com/Linear-Algebra-5th-Stephen-Friedberg/dp/0134860241/ref=tmm_hrd_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=">Linear Algebra 5th Edition</a></li>
</ul>






















