---
layout: post
title:  "Lecture 9: Basis Vectors and The Replacement Theorem"
date:   2024-07-30 01:01:36 -0700
categories: jekyll update
mathjax: true
---
This is the proof for theorem 1.9 from the book that doesn't assume we know the replacement theorem (1.10) yet.
<div class="purdiv">
Theorem 1.9
</div>
<div class="purbdiv">
If a vector space \(V\) is generated by a finite set \(S\), then some subset of \(S\) is a basis for \(V\). Hence \(V\) has a finite basis.
</div>
<br>
Proof: Let $$V$$ be a vector space generated by a finite set $$G$$. If $$G = \emptyset$$ or $$G = \{0\}$$, then $$V = \{0\}$$ and $$\emptyset$$ is a subset of $$G$$ that is a basis for $$V$$. Otherwise $$G$$ has at least one non-zero vector $$u_1$$. Let $$\beta = \{u_1\}$$. We know $$\beta$$ is linearly independent. Now, keep adding vectors from $$G$$ to $$\beta$$ while keeping $$\beta$$ linearly independent. Since $$G$$ is a finite set, then this process must end with a linearly independent set of vectors $$\{u_1, u_2, ..., u_k\}$$. We have two cases
<ol>
	<li>\(\beta = G\). This means that \(G\) is linearly independent. We know \(G\) is a generating set for \(V\) and so it is a basis for \(V\) and we are done.</li>
	<li>\(\beta\) is a proper subset of \(G\) that is linearly independent. We need to show that \(\beta\) generates \(V\). From theorem 1.5 (the span of any subset \(S\) of \(V\) is a subspace of \(V\) that contains \(S\) (\(S \subseteq span(S)\)). Moreover, any subspace of \(V\) that contains \(S\) must also contain the span of \(S\)), we need to show that \(S \subseteq span(\beta)\). To do this, let \(v \in S\), we need to show that \(v \in span(\beta)\). If \(v \in \beta\), then \(v \in span(\beta)\) and we are done since. Otherwise, if \(v \not\in \beta\), then \(\{v \cup \beta\}\) must be a linearly dependent set since we know \(\beta\) is linearly independent by construction. Since adding \(v\) turned the set into a linearly dependent set, then we know that \(v\) can be written as a linear combination of the elements of \(\beta\) which means that \(v \in span(\beta)\) as we wanted to show. Therefore, \(S \subseteq span(\beta)\). \(\blacksquare\) </li>
</ol>
<br>
<br>

Study notes: <a href="">Here</a>is another proof from the book.
<br>
<br>
<!------------------------------------------------------------------------------------>
<h4><b>References:</b></h4>
<ul>
<li><a href="https://www.amazon.com/Linear-Algebra-5th-Stephen-Friedberg/dp/0134860241/ref=tmm_hrd_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=">Linear Algebra 5th Edition</a></li>
</ul>
























