---
layout: post
title:  "[2.1] Group Theory: First Results"
date:   2024-11-09 01:01:36 -0700
categories: jekyll update
mathjax: true
---
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h4><b>The Symmetric Group</b></h4>
A little more on the symmetric group example above. A permutation is a bijection from a set to itself. A <b>symmetric group</b> is the set of all permutations on a set with the composition as the group operation. 
<br>
<br>
This is a group because the identity element is the identity transformation and it is a valid permutation so it's in the set. The inverse transformation is the inverse element. We are guaranteed to have an inverse because any bijection has an inverse and the inverse of a permutation is another permutation. The composition of permutations is another permutation so the group is closed under composition. Finally, the product is associative.
<br>
<br>
The symmetric group on a set $$A$$ is denoted by $$S_A$$. The symmetric group on the set $$\{1,2,3,...,n\}$$ is denoted by $$S_n$$ where $$n$$ is the number of elements.
<br>
<br>
The simplest symmetric group is $$S_1 = \{e\}$$ because a group can't be empty. It must contain at least one element. 
<br>
<br>
What about $$S_2$$? The set is $$\{1,2\}$$. We have an identity map $$e$$. We also have the map that takes 1 to 2 and 2 to 1. Let this permutation be $$\tau$$. So $$S_2 = \{e, \tau\}$$. Composing $$\tau \circ \tau = e$$. So $$\tau^{-1} = \tau$$. Side note here: When a permutation only changes two elements, it is called a transposition. 
<br>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h4><b>Uniqueness of the Identity and the Inverses</b></h4>
In the next two propositions, we'll prove that the identity element in a group is unique and similarly the inverses are unique.
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition 2.1.1 (Uniqueness of the identity)
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Let \(G\) be a group and suppose \(e\) and \(e'\) are both identity elements in \(G\); that is, for all \(g \in G\), \(eg = ge = e'g = ge' = g\). Then \(e = e'\).
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
Since $$e$$ is an identity element, then $$e'e = e'$$ and since $$e'$$ is an identity element $$ee' = e$$. Therefore, $$e = e'$$. $$\ \blacksquare$$
<br>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition 2.1.2 (Uniqueness of inverses)
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Let \(G\) be a group and let \(h, g \in G\). If \(hg = e\), then \(h = g^{-1}\). Likewise, if \(gh = e\), then \(h = g^{-1}\).
</div>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
Suppose $$hg = e$$, then 
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	 h = h(gg^{-1}) = (hg)g^{-1}= eg^{-1} = g^{-1}.
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
Suppose now that $$gh = e$$, then
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	 g = g(hh^{-1}) = (gh)h^{-1} = eh^{-1} = h^{-1}. \ \blacksquare
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
<br>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Corollary 2.1.3
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Let \(g\) be an element of a group \(G\). We have \(g = (g^{-1})^{-1}\)
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
We know $$gg^{-1} = e$$. By (2.1.2) $$g = (g^{-1})^{-1}$$. $$\ \blacksquare$$
<br>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition 2.1.4
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Let \(G\) be a group and let \(a,b \in G\). Then We have \((ab)^{-1} = b^{-1}a^{-1}\)
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
Notice that $$(ab)(b^{-1}a^{-1}) = a(b((b^{-1}a^{-1})) = a((bb^{-1})a^{-1}) = a(ea^{-1}) = aa^{-1} = e$$. Therefore, $$(ab)^{-1} = b^{-1}a^{-1}$$.
<br>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h4><b>The Left and Right Multiplication Maps</b></h4>

<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition 2.1.5
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Let \(G\) be a group and \(a \in G\). <br>
The map \(L_a: G \rightarrow G\) defined by \(L_a(x) = ax\) is a bijection. Similarly, <br>
the map \(R_a: G \rightarrow G\) defined by \(R_a(x) = xa\) is a bijection.
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
To show that the map $$L_a$$ is a bijection, we need to show that $$L_a$$ is both one to one and onto or equivalently that $$L_a$$ has an inverse. We claim that the left multiplication by $$a^{-1}$$ or $$L_{a^{-1}}$$ is the inverse of $$L_a$$. To see that,
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	L_{a^{-1}}(L_a(x)) = a^{-1}(ax) = (a^{-1}a)x = ex = x.
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
Similarly,
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	L_a(L_{a^{-1}}(x)) = a(a^{-1}x) = (aa^{-1})x = ex = x.
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
So $$L_{a^{-1}}$$ and $$L_a$$ are inverse maps so both are bijective. $$\ \blacksquare$$
<br>
<br>

<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Corollary 2.1.6
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Let \(G\) be a group and let \(a\) and \(b\) be elements of \(G\). The equation \(ax = b\) has a unique solution \(x\) in \(G\). and likewise the equation \(xa = b\) has a unique solution in \(G\).
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
For $$ax = b$$ to have a solution. The map $$L_a$$ needs to be onto or surjective. For the solution to be unique, the map needs to be one to one or injective. Similarly for $$xa = b$$ to have a solution, we want $$R_a$$ to be a bijective. Since we proved earlier that $$L_a$$ and $$R_a$$ are bijections, then both equations have unique solutions. $$\ \blacksquare$$
<br>
<br>


<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Corollary 2.1.7 (Cancellation)
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Suppose \(a, x, y\) are elements of a group \(G\). If \(ax = ay\), then \(x = y\). Similarly, if \(xa = ya\), then \(x = y\).
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
Suppose $$ax = ay$$. We know that $$L_a = ax$$ is one to one. So for any elements $$x, y \in G$$, $$ax = ay$$ must imply that $$x = y$$ by definition of a one to one or injective map. A similar arguments shows that if $$xa = ya$$ must imply that $$x = y$$ by the injectivity of $$R_a$$. $$\ \blacksquare$$
<br>
<br>

<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Corollary 2.1.8
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
If \(G\) is a finite group, each row and each column of the multiplication table of \(G\) contains each element of \(G\) exactly once.
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
A row in the multiplication table can be represented by a left multiplication map $$G \rightarrow G$$ if you fix the element multiplied on the left. We know the left multiplication map is a bijection. Therefore every element/result must be unique and each element of $$G$$ must show up in the row. Similarly, each column can be represented by a right multiplication map. The map is a bijection and so each element must be unique and shown exactly once. (TODO clean up this proof)
<br>
<br>

<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h4><b>Isomorphic Groups</b></h4>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="mintheaderdiv">
Definition 2.1.10
</div>
<div class="mintbodydiv">
The order of a group is its size or cardinality. We will denote the order of a group \(G\) by \(|G|\).
</div>
<br>
[TODO: Examples]
<br>
<br>



<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="mintheaderdiv">
Definition 2.1.13
</div>
<div class="mintbodydiv">
We say two groups \(G\) and \(H\) are isomorphic if there is a bijection \(\phi: G \rightarrow H\) such that for all \(g_1, g_2 \in G, \phi(g_1g_2) = \phi(g_1)\phi(g_2)\). The map \(\phi\) is called an isomorphism.
</div>
<br>
<br>



<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="mintheaderdiv">
Definition 2.1.14
</div>
<div class="mintbodydiv">
A group \(G\) is called abelian (or commutative) if for all elements \(a, b \in G\), the products in the two orders are equal \(ab = ba\).
</div>
<br>
<br>


<!--------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition 2.1.17
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
<ol type="a">
	<li>Up to isomorphism, \(\mathbf{Z_1}\) is the unique group of order 1.</li>
	<li>Up to isomorphism, \(\mathbf{Z_2}\) is the unique group of order 2.</li>
	<li>Up to isomorphism, \(\mathbf{Z_3}\) is the unique group of order 3.</li>
	<li>Up to isomorphism, there are exactly two groups of order 4, namely \(\mathbf{Z_4}\), and the group of rational symmetries of the rectangular card.</li>
	<li>Up to isomorphism, \(\mathbf{Z_5}\) is the unique group of order 5.</li>
	<li>All groups of order no more than 5 are abelian.</li>
	<li>There are at least two non-isomorphic groups of order 6, one abelian and one non-abelian.</li>
</ol>
</div>
<br>
Up to isomorphism just means that that two objects will be considered the same if they are isomorphic. We just want to classify groups into distinct non-isomorphic groups. For example, for statement (c), This means groups of order 3 are all isomorphic to $$\mathbf{Z_3}$$ while statement (d) implies that we have two distinct groups of order 4. 
<br>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
TODO
<br>
<br>
<hr>

<br>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
Again two groups are isomorphic means that the multiplication tables match up. In fact, not only that but the identity elements and inverses of elements match up as well. The following propositions state these facts.
<br>
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition 2.1.18
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
If \(\phi : G \rightarrow H\) is an isomorphism, then \(\phi(e_G) = e_H\), and for each \(g \in G\), \(\phi(g^{-1}) = \phi(g)^{-1}\)
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
Since $$\phi$$ is an isomorphism, then we know that for each $$h \in H$$, there is a $$g \in G$$ such that $$\phi(g) = h$$. Therefore,
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	\phi(e_G)h &= \phi(e_G)\phi(g) \\
	           &= \phi(e_Gg) \quad \text{$\phi$ is an isomorphism}\\
			   &= \phi(g) \\
			   &= h \\
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
So $$\phi(e_G)$$ is an identity element. But since the identity element is unique, then $$\phi(e_G) = \phi(e_H)$$.
<br>
<br>
To show that $$\phi(g^{-1}) = \phi(g)^{-1}$$, see that
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	\phi(g^{-1})\phi(g) &= \phi(g^{-1}g) \quad \text{$\phi$ is an isomorphism} \\
	        &= \phi(e_G) \\
			&= e_H \quad \text{by the previous result} 	
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
So $$\phi(g)$$ is the inverse of $$\phi(g^{-1})$$ or in other words $$\phi(g)^{-1} = \phi(g^{-1})$$ as we wanted to show. $$\ \blacksquare$$
<br>
<br>
<hr>
<br>

<!--------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h4><b>The General Associative Law</b></h4>
We know by definition that the product is associative so for all $$a, b, c \in G$$, we have $$(ab)c = a(bc)$$. What about the product of 4 or more elements? is it associative? For example, there are five ways to group four elements
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	a(b(cd)), a((bc)d), (ab)(cd), (a(bc))d, ((ab)c)d
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
$$a(b(cd))$$ and $$((ab)c)d$$ follow from the definition. For the rest, see that
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	a(bcd) = a(b(cd)) = (ab)(cd) = ((ab)c)d = (abc)d
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
In general this works for any number of elements. This is formally presented in the next proposition.
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition 2.1.19 (General associative law)
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
Let \(M\) be a set with an associative operation, \(M \times M \rightarrow M\), denoted by juxtaposition. For every \(n \geq 1\), there is a unique product \(M^n \rightarrow M\),
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	(a_1, a_2,...,a_n) \rightarrow a_1a_2...a_n,
	\end{align*}
	$$
such that
<ol type="a">
	<li> The product of one element is that element \((a) = a\).</li>
	<li> The product of two elements agrees with the given operation \((ab) = ab\).</li>
	<li>For all \(n \geq 2\), for all \(a_1,...,a_n \in M\), and for all \(1 \leq k \leq n-1\), 
		$$
		\begin{align*}
		a_1a_2...a_n = (a_1...a_k)(a_{k-1}...a_n)
		\end{align*}
		$$
	</li>
</ol>
</div>
<br>
<b>Proof</b>
<br>
By induction on $$n$$. <br>
Base Case: For $$n \leq 3$$, property $$(c)$$ holds by definition.
<br>
Inductive Case: Suppose this is true for all $$1 \leq r \leq n$$ where a unique product of $$r$$ elements satisfies the properties $$(a)-(c)$$ above. Suppose now that we have $$n$$ elements. Fix elements $$a_1, ...,a_n \in M$$. By the inductive hypothesis, the $$n-1$$ products
<div>
	$$
	\begin{align*}
	p_k = (a_1...a_k)(a_{k+1}...a_n),
	\end{align*}
	$$
</div>
are defined since we have at most $$n-1$$ elements. ... [TODO]
<br>
<br>
<hr>
<br>
<!---------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h4><b>References</b></h4>
<ul>
<li><a href="https://homepage.divms.uiowa.edu/~goodman/algebrabook.dir/algebrabook.html">Algebra: Abstract and Concrete by Frederick M. Goodman</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VdLhQs_y_E8&list=PLelIK3uylPMGzHBuR3hLMHrYfMqWWsmx5">Algebra: Abstract Lectures By Benedict Gross</a></li>
<li><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NwqCi63p2ik">Math of Wrath Youtube Channel</a>
</ul>






















