---
layout: post
title:  "Lecture 32: Rings"
date:   2025-02-24 01:01:36 -0700
categories: jekyll update
mathjax: true
---

Let $$G$$ be a group that acts on $$X$$. Define
<!----------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="mintheaderdiv">
Definition
</div>
<div class="mintbodydiv">
A Ring: \(R, +, \cdot\) is a \(R\)-set with \(+, \cdot\) operations on \(R\) such that
<ul>
	<li>\(R, +\) is an abelian group with \(0\) as the identity and \(-a\) as the inverse of \(a \in R\).</li>
	<li>Multiplication is associative so \((ab)c = a(bc)\) for all \(a,b,c \in R\).</li>
	<li>Distributive Law: \((a + b)c = (ac) + (bc)\) and \((a(b + c) = (ab) + (ac)\).</li>
</ul>
</div>
Warning: we don't know if $$a + b \cdot c$$ should be $$(a + b) \cdot c$$ or $$a + (b \cdot c)$$. The convention is to use the second (operator precedence).
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>More Terminology</h3>
<ul>
	<li><b>Ring with identity</b>: This means a rin with a multiplicative identity since a ring always has an additive identity but not necessarily a multiplicative identity. This is a ring \(R\) such that \(\exists 1 \in R\) so that \(1a = a1 = a\) for all \(a \in R\).</li>
	<!----->
	<li><b>Commutative Ring</b>: A ring \(R\) such that \(ab = ba\) for all \(a, b \in R\).</li>
	<!---->
	<li>If \(R\) has a multiplicative identity, then \(a \in R\) is a unit if there exists a \(b\) in \(R\) such that \(ab = 1 = ba\). We call \(b\) an inverse of \(a\) and write \(b = a^{-1}\). (So a unit is an element with a multiplicative inverse)</li>
</ul>
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>Basic Facts in a Ring</h3>
<ol>
	<li>\(a0 = 0 = 0a\) for all \(a \in R\). To show this, use the distributive law to see that
		<div>
		$$
		\begin{align*}
		0a = (0 + 0)a = 0a + 0a. 
		\end{align*}
		$$
		</div>
	But \(R\) is abelian with respect to addition so we can cancel \(0a\) from both sides to see that \(0 = 0a\).</li>
	<!----->
	<li>If \(1 \in R\), then \(-a = (-1)a\). So this says the additive inverse is -1 multiplied by \(a\). To see why, observe that
		<div>
		$$
		\begin{align*}
		(1 + (-1))a &= 1a + (-1)a \\
		     0a &= 0.
		\end{align*}
		$$
		</div>
	  </li>
	  <!----->
	  <li>The multiplicative identity is unique if it exists.</li>
	  <!----->
	  <li>If \(1 \in R\) and \(a\) is unit in \(R\), then it has a unique inverse</li>
	  <!----->
	  <li>If \(1 \in R\), then define \((R^{\times},\cdot)\) as the set of units in \(R\) so \((R^{\times},\cdot) = \{\text{units }a \in R\}\). So this is set of the elements that have a multiplicative inverse. This set with the multiplication operation is a group. As a consequence, if \(a\) and \(b\) are units, then their product is in \(R^{\times}\). In fact, \((ab)^{-1} = b^{-1}a^{-1}\).</li>	  
</ol>
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>The Zero Ring</h3>
This is a ring $$R$$ with element $$R = \{0\}$$. $$0 + 0 = 0$$ and $$0 \cdot 0 = 0$$. This is a commutative ring with identity. The multiplicative identity is $$1 = 0$$ in this ring. In fact, If $$R$$ is a ring with 1, then $$1 = 0$$ if and only if $$R = \{0\}$$. Sometimes this ring is excluded from the definition of rings ...
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>Fields</h3>
<div class="mintheaderdiv">
Definition
</div>
<div class="mintbodydiv">
A Field is a commutative ring with 1 such that every nonzero element is a unit and \(1 \neq 0\).
</div>
So we're excluding the zero ring here.
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>Examples</h3>
<ul>
	<li>\(\mathbf{Z}\) with addition and multiplication is a commutative ring with identity.</li>
	<!----->
	<li>\(\mathbf{Z}2 = \{2n \ | \ n \in \mathbf{Z}\}\) is a commutative ring but it doesn't have the identity \(1 \not\in \mathbf{Z}2\).</li>
	<!---->
	<li>\(\mathbf{Q}, \mathbf{R}, \mathbf{C}\) are all fields.</li>
	<!---->
	<li>For \(n \geq 1\), \(\mathbf{Z}_n\) is a commutative ring with \(1 = [1]_n\). It is a field if and only if \(n\) is a prime.</li>
	<!---->
	<li>Let \(R\) be any ring. Then \(S = \text{Mat}_{n \times n}(R)\) the set of matrices with entries in \(R\) is 
	also a ring with matrix addition/multiplication.</li>
	    <ul>
	    <li>If \(1 \in R\) so \(R\) includes the multiplicative identity. Then, \(I \in S\).</li>
	    <li>If \(R\) is commutative. Then, \(S\) might not be commutative.</li>
	   </ul>
	<!---->
	<li>Rings of functions: if \(X\) is an arbitrary set and \(R\) is an arbitrary function, then \(F(X,R) = \{ \text{ all functions } \ | \ f: X \rightarrow R \ \}\) is a ring via a pointwise operation. What's a pointwise operation? Given two different functions \(f, g: X \rightarrow R\), then define 
		<div>
		$$
		\begin{align*}
		(f + g)(x) &:= f(x) + g(x) \\
		(fg)(x) &:= f(x)g(x) \quad \text{ for } x \in X
		\end{align*}
		$$
		</div>
	As long as the target is a ring this works. No restriction on \(X\).
	</li>
</ul>
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>Subrings</h3>
A subring $$S$$ of ring $$R$$ is a subset, which is a ring via operation inherited from $$R$$. This implies that if $$a, b \in S$$, then $$a + b, ab \in S$$. To show $$S$$ is a subring, we have the following proposition
<br>
<!----------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<div class="peachheaderdiv">
Proposition
</div>
<div class="peachbodydiv">
\(R\) ring, a subset \(S \subseteq R\) is a subring if and only if
<ul>
	<li>\(0 \in S\) or \(S \neq \emptyset\).</li>
	<li>if \(a,b \in S\), then \(a + b, ab \in S\).</li>
	<li>If \(s \in S\) then \(-a \in S\).</li>
</ul>
</div>
<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>Examples</h3>
<ul>
	<li>\(\mathbf{Z}\) is a ring and \(\mathbf{Z}2\) is a subring.</li>
	<!----->
	<li>\(\mathbf{Z} \subseteq \mathbf{Q} \subseteq \mathbf{R} \subseteq \mathbf{C}\) are subrings.</li>
	<!----->
	<li> \(R = \text{Mat}_{n \times n}(\mathbf{R})\) be the ring of 2 by 2 matrices with entries in \(\mathbf{R}\). Then, \(S = \big\{ \begin{pmatrix}a & -b \\ b & a \end{pmatrix} \big\}, a, b \in R\) is a subring. In fact, \(S \cong \mathbf{C}\) as rings</li>
</ul>
Warning: we can have a subring $$S \subseteq R$$ such that $$1_S \in S$$ and $$1_R \in R$$ but $$1_S \neq 1_S$$.
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>Complex Numbers</h3>
One way to describe the complex numbers is to say that the elements of $$\mathbf{C}$$ are "formal expressions" $$a + bi$$ where $$a, b \in \mathbf{R}$$ and $$i$$ is a new symbol. We add in the usual way and when we multiply, we use the identity $$i^2 = -1$$. 
<br>
<br>
Another way to describe the complex numbers is to say that the elements of $$C$$ are vectors $$(a,b)$$ in $$\mathbf{R}^2$$ where we have a special notation for $$1 = (1, 0)$$ and $$i = (0, 1)$$. Now, define $$+$$ by vector addition and define $$\cdot$$ by 
<div>
$$
\begin{align*}
(a, b) \cdot (a', b') = (aa' - bb', ab' + ba')
\end{align*}
$$
</div>
In terms of the older notation where $$(a,b) = a+bi$$, it is 
<div>
$$
\begin{align*}
(a + bi)(a' + b'i) = (aa' - bb') + (ab' + ba')i
\end{align*}
$$
</div>
$$\mathbf{C}$$ is a commutative ring with 1. In fact, $$\mathbf{C}$$ is a field. Why? because we have straight forward formula to finding the inverse. First observe what happens when we multiply by the complex conjugate
<div>
$$
\begin{align*}
(a + bi)(a' - b'i) = (a^2 + b^2) + 0i.
\end{align*}
$$
</div>
Fact: if $$a, b \in \mathbf{R}$$ and $$(a,b) \neq (0,0)$$, then $$a^2 + b^2 > 0$$. From this we get the inverse formula
<div>
$$
\begin{align*}
\frac{a}{a^2+b^2} + \frac{-b}{a^2+b^2}i = (a + bi)^{-1} 
\end{align*}
$$
</div>
So every non-zero element has a multiplicative inverse and so it's a field because we have this formula.
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>Example</h3>
Let $$R = \mathbf{Z}_3[i]$$ is ring. This is the set of formal expressions $$a + bi$$ where $$a, b \in \mathbf{Z}_3$$. $$i$$ is a symbol such that $$i^2 = [-1]_3 = -1$$.
<br>
<br>
We can check very easily that $$R$$ is a commutative ring with identity. Is $$R$$ a field? It's obvious but the answer is yes. So for any $$a, b \in \mathbf{Z}_3$$ where $$(a,b) \neq (0,0)$$, then $$a^2 + b^2 \neq 0$$. Why? observe that, $$0^2 = 0$$, $$1^2 = 1$$ but $$2^2 = 1$$ in $$\mathbf{Z}_3$$. So the only way to get $$a^2 + b^2 = 0$$ is to have $$a = b = 0$$. The formula for a multiplicative inverse is
<div>
$$
\begin{align*}
(a + bi)^{-1} = \frac{a}{a^2+b^2} + \frac{-b}{a^2+b^2}i 
\end{align*}
$$
</div>
Therefore, $$\mathbf{Z}_3[i]$$ is a field with 9 elements. Call this $$\mathbf{F}_9$$.
<br>
<br>
What about $$\mathbf{Z}_5[i]$$? is it a field? No. Because $$(2 + i)$$ doesn't have a multiplicative in $$\mathbf{Z}_5[i]$$. To see this, observe that
<div>
$$
\begin{align*}
(2 + i) \cdot (2 - i) = 2^2 + i^2 + 5 = 0 
\end{align*}
$$
</div>
<hr>

<!------------------------------------------------------------------------->
<h3>References</h3>
<ul>
	<li>MATH417 by Charles Rezk</li>
	<li><a href="https://homepage.divms.uiowa.edu/~goodman/algebrabook.dir/algebrabook.html">Algebra: Abstract and Concrete by Frederick M. Goodman</a></li>
</ul>






















